Monthly Meetings
================
:Author: cehteh, Ichthyostega

We conduct regular developer meetings on IRC as described in link:Lumiera/DesignProcess/MonthlyDeveloperMeetingOnIRC[]

This page announces the next meeting. _Feel free to edit the agenda if you want to discuss some topic!_

 * The past monthly meetings including the *protocols* can be found on the link:Lumiera/PastMonthlyMeetings[] page.
 * If you are doomed to write the protocol, you may have a look at the link:Lumiera/MeetingProtocolTemplate[protocol template].
 * For general discussions see also the http://lists.lumiera.org/pipermail/lumiera[Lumiera Mailing List]


Next Monthly Meeting: Wednesday Feb. 11, 2009 20:00 UTC
-------------------------------------------------------
as usual on #lumiera at freenode.net


Topics
~~~~~~
 * organisational (protocol, agenda, leftovers?)
 * How to proceed with the Logo
 * State of the Workflow discussion
 * link:AsciiDoc[] Day
 * GSoC
 * GUI-Integration: Summary and next steps
 * Design Process: Go through Ideas and Drafts
 * Next meeting 
