2008-10-10 Lumiera Dev Meeting
==============================
:Author: Ichthyostega
:Date: 2008-10-15

Oct 10, 2008 on #lumiera 19:00 - 23:15 UTC +

__Participants__

 * cehteh
 * ichthyo
 * joelholdsworth
 * ...
 
_Protocol written by XXXXX_



Recurring Topics
----------------
Discussion of open http://www.pipapo.org/pipawiki/Lumiera/DesignProcess[design process] drafts.


Prop1
~~~~~
http://www.pipapo.org/pipawiki/Lumiera/DesignProcess/Prop1[descriptive name]
Summary what issues are discussed
..Details..

__Conclusion__: drop it



Topic 1
-------
Summary what is discussed

_''cehteh''_ points out that...

_''joelholdsworth''_ adds....


Conclusion
~~~~~~~~~~

 * do this
 * do that



Next meeting
------------

The next meeting will be at Wednesday XX XX 21:00 UTC


''''


.Discussion of details
----
12:51 cehteh key/value pairs
12:51 gmerlin not sure about that
12:51 cehteh i am pretty sure that i want that in lumiera

( shortened and tidied transcript of some interesting detailed discussions )
----
dummy
